End of the windmill era: NSW switches to safer, more efficient solar water pumps | Australia news | The Guardian

Sunset along the Waugan Road, Eugowra. The new solar pump may lack the charm of a rusty Comet or Southern Cross windmill but farmers say it’s a ‘revolution’.
Photograph: Kim Storey/Kim Storey Photography
View image in fullscreen
Sunset along the Waugan Road, Eugowra. The new solar pump may lack the charm of a rusty Comet or Southern Cross windmill but farmers say it’s a ‘revolution’.
Photograph: Kim Storey/Kim Storey Photography
The rural network
Australia news
This article is more than
1 year old
End of the windmill era: NSW switches to safer, more efficient solar water pumps
This article is more than 1 year old
Local land services say the new pumps will allow them to remotely monitor water levels, to provide a safe refuge for farmers in times of natural disaster
Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter
Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the community
Supported by
About this content
Eliza Spencer
Thu 6 Jun 2024 01.00 AEST
Last modified on Fri 4 Oct 2024 12.39 AEST
Share
It’s a silhouette that has become part of the Australian landscape: angled metal blades and a wind vane whirring in the breeze to keep water tanks and stock troughs full.
But on the stock routes of
New South Wales
, the time of the windmill is coming to an end.
The NSW Local Land Services is slowly removing windmills from their travelling stock reserves, part of a $950,000 plan to replace them with safer, easier to maintain solar-powered pumps.
If regional communities don’t want a windfarm, why would they accept a nuclear power station? | Gabrielle Chan
Read more
“Windmills are a renewable source of pumping water and we’re replacing them with an updated renewable source,” says LSS Riverina manager of biosecurity and emergency services, Michael Leane.
The new pumps may lack the romantic charm of a rusty Comet or Southern Cross windmill, but Leane says the “agtech” rollout will make it possible to remotely track water levels, pump function and watering systems – crucial during emergencies when farmers need safe land for stock to graze and drink.
View image in fullscreen
New solar pumps have entered the market and dramatically reduced the upfront cost.
Photograph: Local Land Services NSW
“One of the major purposes [of the project] is for when there is a flood, fire or drought,” he says. “Our reserves are part of the DNA of this country. We need to maintain them, they’re a refuge.”
The decommissioned windmills will be auctioned off by the LSS.
Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter
Fan-wheeled windmills
were first produced in Britain and the United States before being imported into Australia in the middle of the 19th century. An Australian market took off in the 1870s, helping settlers draw underground water in areas outside the Great Artesian Basin.
Pastoralist Gillian Fennell comes from a family of windmill contractors, covering vast distances across the Queensland tablelands and Northern Territory rangelands. Fennell seems an unlikely advocate for the phase-out of windmills but she says the benefits far outweigh the beauty, and the risks.
View image in fullscreen
Local Land Services offices and farmers are contemplating the phase-out of windmills.
Photograph: Local Land Services NSW
“Erecting and maintaining a windmill is a hazardous job,” she says. “You’re working at heights with no safety harness, on a massive piece of machinery that has no real off switch.
Boorowa: the small town near Australia’s capital that has been without drinking water for 26 days
Read more
“Diesel pumps solved some of these issues by putting the pumping mechanism at ground level … but exposed pulleys and belts claimed their fair share of fingers, arms and lives.”
With new solar pumps entering the market and dramatically reducing the upfront cost, Fennell says she’s seen a shift away from windmills to safer and more effective pumps.
“In remote areas where labour is in short supply and
access to qualified technicians is almost nonexistent
, producers are now almost completely self-sufficient in the installation and maintenance of their solar water pumping,” she says.
“It’s been a revolution for those of us who live and work in the rangelands of Australia.”
Eugowra farmer and photographer
Kim Storey
says that, in the latter role, she loves seeing windmills.
“But as a farmer, I understand and I’m impressed by the progression in technology that’s bringing solar pumps as a replacement,” she says.
Storey says windmills have become a symbol of Australian agriculture.
“The windmill is an iconic image of rural Australia, and has enabled farming to progress right across the country in the early days,” she says. “It brings a sense of nostalgia to rural images.”
With albums full of windmills photographed at all hours of the day and night, Storey says she’ll still keep an eye out for the older pumps when she’s on the road with her camera gear.
“When I’m looking at big skies and big sunsets, I’m always looking for something in the foreground to create a bit of interest. When you find a windmill, that fits the bill pretty quickly,” she says.
Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter
Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the community
Explore more on these topics
Australia news
The rural network
Rural and regional Australia
New South Wales
Water
features
Share
Reuse this content