Freshwater habitats - The Australian Museum

Homepage
Discover & Learn
For teachers and students
Science learning resources
Freshwater habitats
Freshwater habitats
Updated
21/04/22
Read time
2 minutes
Click to enlarge image
Toggle Caption
Fresh-Water habitat
Image: Andrew Howells
© Australian Museum
Freshwater habitats include lakes, rivers, billabongs, wetlands and ponds. Many animals and plants live in or near these habitats. They rely on them to provide food, shelter and a place to breed.
Lake
Lakes are large areas of still water. Some large fresh water lakes dry up in times of drought.
River
Rivers are pathways of flowing water. The water can be fast flowing or flowing slowly. Some large rivers in Australia include the Murray River, the Derwent River and the Katherine River.
Stream
Streams are small flows of water. Sometimes they are called creeks or rivulets.
Pond
A pond is a small pool of still water.
Wetland
Wetlands are areas with lots water plants such as reeds, grasses and lilies. Fresh water wetlands increase in size after rain. Lots of birds move into wetlands after rain.
Billabong
Billabongs are small pools of water that appear next to rivers after heavy rain.
Support our education programs
Your donation will help our educators develop new and engaging education programs for the next generation.
Make a donation
habitat
Freshwater habitats
Back to top of main content
Go back to top of page
Also in this section
Birds conversation starters
Self-led
All ages
Learn how to classify rocks
Worksheet
Echidna research in the Mammalogy collection
Video
Digital story
Australian Geographic Nature Photographer of the Year conversation starters
Self-led
All ages
Digital games: Caring for our Coast
Natural history
Preschools
Sustainability
DNA barcoding: Secondary unit
Science, Biology
Stage 5 and 6
Dragonfly life cycle
Make your own butterfly envelope
Worksheet
Craft activity
Climate change resources
Blogs
Podcasts
Publications
Animal adaptations unit
Science
Stages 2–3
Charles Darwin and the antlion
Worksheet
Video
Capturing Climate Change for educators
Digital story
You may also be interested in...
Intertidal habitats
The area where the land meets the sea is referred to as the intertidal habitat.
Discover more
Coastal habitats
Coasts are places where the land meets the sea.
Discover more
Freshwater Moray,
Gymnothorax polyuranodon
(Bleeker, 1853)
Freshwater Moray, Gymnothorax polyuranodon (Bleeker, 1853)
Discover more
Can farm dams help support frog conservation?
With the help of tens of thousands of citizen scientists across Australia, scientists from Deakin University and the Australian Museum explored the value of farm dams to frogs and determined what features of dams support more frog species.
14 September 2023
Read more
Antarctic habitats
Many animals live in and visit Antarctica and the islands around it. Antarctic habitats include pack ice, mountains and the surrounding seas.
Discover more
Rural habitats
Rural, or agricultural, landscapes dominate the western area of Greater Sydney and cover 33 per cent of the region.
Discover more
The most threatened animals in the world
A new IUCN report reveals that nearly every second freshwater species on some of the islands off East Africa are threatened with extinction.
Read more
Pulmonate phylogeny based on 28S rRNA gene sequences: A framework for discussing habitat transitions and character transformation
AM Publication
Read more
Freshwater habitats
Freshwater habitats are found throughout the Sydney region.
Discover more
Habitats
Explore seven different animal and plant habitats: coasts, freshwater, Antarctica, forests, woodlands, arid zone and urban.
Coastal
Arid zone
Woodland
Learn more
Forest habitats
Forests are places with tall trees and a thick canopy. In Australia the three main types of forest include dry forests, wet forests and rainforests.
Discover more
Arid habitats
Australia is the second driest continent in the world. This does not mean that areas without fresh water do not have plants and animals. In fact, arid zone habitats are full of life. Some arid zone habitats include tall shrubs, heath, grasslands, sandy areas and rocky areas.
Discover more