5 stunning pink lakes in Australia that look too good to be true

Australia has some of the most striking natural wonders in the world, but its pink lakes are among the most surreal. These shimmering bodies of water, tinted by natural processes, range from delicate pastels to vivid bubblegum hues. Either viewed from the ground or the air, they are indeed a feast for the eyes and a photographer’s dream. Here are five spectacular pink lakes you can add to your next Australian adventure.
Just a one-and-a-half-hour flight from Perth, you will find this charming beach town of Esperance, which serves as a gateway to dozens of pink and rainbow lakes. Here, you get to witness lakes that display a palette that shifts from soft pastel pink to rich orange and deep red. To get the best experience, plan your visit between June and January. Do note that one of the best ways to enjoy this natural spectacle is from the skies, which also gives you breathtaking views of Cape Le Grand National Park’s white sands and turquoise coastline.
Located less than a six-hour drive north of Perth, Hutt Lagoon is one of Western Australia’s most famous pink lakes. Its colour changes so dramatically depending on the time of day, season, and cloud cover, that you would need to see it to believe it. The colours shift from bright red to pink or even purple. For the best experience, plan your visit during mid-morning or sunset. You can also enjoy its beauty while cruising along George Grey Drive or take a bird’s-eye view with Shine Aviation or Kalbarri Scenic Flights.
Deep in South Australia’s outback, about a six-hour drive or 1.5-hour flight from Adelaide, lies Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre. This enormous salt lake can be seen usually as a glistening white pan, but every few years, when it floods, it turns into a kaleidoscope of pinks, oranges, and yellows. In short, the flood brings life to the surrounding desert, attracting flocks of birds and turning the lake into a vibrant oasis. For the best experience, take to the skies and witness the vast expanse of colours stretching to the horizon.
Lake Bumbunga, which is just under two hours from Adelaide,  is both accessible and incredibly photogenic. Its striking magenta and white shores keep changing depending on the salinity of the water, which in turn makes each visit unique. It’s a popular spot for photographers seeking vibrant landscapes. Once you’ve captured your shots, you can head less than an hour north to the Clare Valley, one of South Australia’s finest wine regions, to enjoy a glass of its renowned riesling at cellar doors like Sevenhill Cellars or Eldredge.
One of the most intensely pink lakes in the country, Lake MacDonnell owes its vivid colour to its high salt concentration. Located in South Australia’s Eyre Peninsula, it offers a unique visual contrast, the bubblegum-pink water on one side of Watermelon Avenue, and striking blue-green water on the other. The road itself is an Instagram sensation, but the scenery doesn’t stop there. At the end of the drive, you’ll find Cactus Beach, known for its spectacular coastal views and world-class surf.