Australia's pink lakes: The remnants of ancient rivers now teeming with microbes that make rosy pigments | Live Science

Planet Earth
Microbiology
Australia's pink lakes: The remnants of ancient rivers now teeming with microbes that make rosy pigments
Features
By
Sascha Pare
published
1 August 2025
Pink lakes in Western Australia get their color from pigments produced by microbes, but climate change and other human threats are killing these tiny organisms.
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission.
Here’s how it works
.
Lake Hillier is one of Australia's best-known pink lakes.
(Image credit: Philip Thurston/Getty Images)
Share
Share by:
Copy link
Facebook
X
Whatsapp
Reddit
Flipboard
Share this article
0
Join the conversation
Follow us
Add us as a preferred source on Google
Newsletter
Subscribe to our newsletter
QUICK FACTS
Name:
Lake Hillier, Pink Lake and others
Location:
Western Australia
Coordinates:
-34.09487137998776, 123.20277096721424
Why it's incredible:
Bacteria and microalgae turn these lakes bubblegum-pink.
Australia's pink lakes are bodies of water that harbor rare, pigment-producing microbes. The lakes are about 10 times saltier than the ocean, attracting algae and bacteria that churn out beta-carotene — a red-orange pigment that also gives carrots, crayfish and flamingos their characteristic colors.
Most of the country's pink lakes are found in Western Australia, which has around a dozen. The lakes are the remnants of rivers that flowed across the landscape more than 15 million years ago, which makes them thousands of years old, according to
National Geographic
.
As the ancient rivers dried up, pockets of water were left over and partially evaporated over time, concentrating salt and attracting salt-loving microorganisms such as
Dunaliella salina
and
Salinibacter ruber
— which are single-celled algae and red bacteria, respectively.
D. salina
and
S. ruber
produce beta-carotene when exposed to sunlight, turning the lakes different shades of pink depending on salt levels. Beta-carotene protects these microorganisms from ultraviolet rays and absorbs light energy, enabling them to thrive and reproduce, according to National Geographic.
You may like
Extreme bloom of toxic algae swirls in Nevada's 'Pyramid Lake'
Coral Triangle: The giant hidden 'Amazon' beneath the sea that appears somewhat resilient to climate change
Deep snow blanket transforms Yellowstone Lake into a giant white void
But pink lakes are fragile because changes in salinity can upset their regular inhabitants. Heavy rainfall, for example, can dilute the lakes' salt content to the extent that photosynthetic algae completely replace
D. salina
and
S. ruber
.
This recently happened at Lake Hillier on Western Australia's Middle Island, according to
ABC News
. Lake Hillier previously harbored a
wide array of pigment-producing microbes
, but extreme rainfall due to climate change in 2022 disturbed this community. As a result, the lake turned from pink to blue-gray — but experts think it could recover within the next 10 years if salinity returns to its previous levels.
Related:
Lake Natron: The caustic, blood-red lake in Tanzania that turns animals to 'stone'
Lake Hillier is not the only pink lake to have lost its rosy tint. Pink Lake, situated near Esperance in Western Australia, turned blue-gray in the 2000s after a century of salt mining. Salt was extracted to make table salt, salt licks for livestock, and preservatives for meat and hides, according to National Geographic. By the early 2000s, there was not enough salt left in Pink Lake for species like
D. salina
and
S. ruber
to survive. As photosynthetic algae took over, the change in color was so dramatic that locals lobbied for the lake to be renamed.
Sign up for the Live Science daily newsletter now
Get the world’s most fascinating discoveries delivered straight to your inbox.
Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands
Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors
By submitting your information you agree to the
Terms & Conditions
and
Privacy Policy
and are aged 16 or over.
MORE INCREDIBLE PLACES
—
Mount Thor: The mountain with Earth's longest vertical drop
—
Whale Valley: The whale graveyard in the Sahara desert that shows they once had feet and toes
—
Taal Lake: The volcanic crater that has 'an island within a lake, within an island within a lake, within an island'
Unlike Lake Hillier, experts don't think that Pink Lake will recover naturally any time soon — but scientists have suggested artificially pumping salt from nearby salt lakes into Pink Lake to return it to pre-mining levels.
Pink lakes are feeding grounds for nomadic and migratory birds, and they host invertebrates like brine shrimp and salt lake snails, which makes them valuable ecosystems. Extreme environments like pink lakes also help scientists to understand the potential for
life on Mars
.
"They still produce some of the toughest organisms on the planet,"
Angus Lawrie
, a conservation biologist and research associate at Curtin University in Australia, told National Geographic.
Discover more
incredible places
, where we highlight the fantastic history and science behind some of the most dramatic landscapes on Earth.
Sascha Pare
Social Links Navigation
Staff writer
Sascha is a U.K.-based staff writer at Live Science. She holds a bachelor’s degree in biology from the University of Southampton in England and a master’s degree in science communication from Imperial College London. Her work has appeared in The Guardian and the health website Zoe. Besides writing, she enjoys playing tennis, bread-making and browsing second-hand shops for hidden gems.
Show More Comments
You must confirm your public display name before commenting
Please logout and then login again, you will then be prompted to enter your display name.
Logout
Read more
Extreme bloom of toxic algae swirls in Nevada's 'Pyramid Lake'
Coral Triangle: The giant hidden 'Amazon' beneath the sea that appears somewhat resilient to climate change
Deep snow blanket transforms Yellowstone Lake into a giant white void
Extreme 'paradise' volcano in Costa Rica is like a piece of ancient Mars on our doorstep
Pair of 'holy' islands in eerily green African lake hold centuries-old relics and mummified emperors
Scientists discover 85 'active' lakes buried beneath Antarctica's ice
Latest in Microbiology
Embattled 'arsenic life' paper retracted by journal Science 15 years after publication
'It is our obligation to future generations': Scientists want thousands of human poop samples for microbe 'doomsday vault'
'Mirror life forms' may sound like science fiction, but scientists warn they could be deadly to humans and destroy the environment
Mouse brains, cannabis plants and spider eyes: 20 jaw-dropping images of the microscopic world around us
'Loch ness monster' microbe stretches its neck to 30 times its body length in seconds
'The most critically harmful fungi to humans': How the rise of C. auris was inevitable
Latest in Features
An otherwise 'fit' man had a stroke after drinking 8 'high-potency' energy drinks a day
Science history: Norwegian explorer wins the treacherous race to the South Pole, while British rival perishes along with his crew — Dec. 14, 1911
Strange, 7-hour explosion from deep space is unlike anything scientists have seen — Space photo of the week
Can a turtle tuck its head all the way inside its shell?
China's Great Green Wall: The giant artificial forest designed to slow the expansion of 2 deserts
How are 'traumatic tattoos' made, and do you have one?
LATEST ARTICLES
1
Pumas in Patagonia started feasting on penguins — but now they're behaving strangely, a new study finds
2
Spiders on Jupiter? Scientists uncover secret origins of arachnid-like 'demon' lurking on gas giant's moon.
3
Detectorists find Anglo-Saxon treasure hoard that may have been part of a 'ritual killing'
4
Saturn's largest moon may be riddled with 'slushy tunnels' that contain alien life, new study hints
5
James Webb telescope finds supermassive black hole hidden inside 'Jekyll and Hyde' galaxy