Australian native gardens, natural ponds and water features — Ben Hutchinson Landscapes – Native Australian Gardens

Australian Native Gardens
We are passionate about designing and building beautiful, sustainable outdoor spaces that thrive in our local climate, create habitat for our wildlife and connect people with the beauty of the Australian landscape.
Natural pond resort-style living
Boronia, Victoria.
A truly epic backyard transformation for this wonderful home in Boronia, the whole backyard has been turned into what we can only describe as a entertainers paradise.  Complete with a sunken firepit, natural pond, waterfalls, Aquascape sphere water feature, and full planting of an eclectic selection of  natives, exotics and carnivorous plants!
This project also features the most amazing array of white and coloured lights that extend the enjoyment of this space from day to night, 365 days of the year! This is resort-style landscaping at its finest.
This gorgeous water feature was constructed in 2023 and is a sensational example of what you can achieve in a residential backyard.
Pondless stream paradise
Eltham, Victoria.
Nestled between the garage wall and the lounge room window, right at the front door to this beautiful family home is a ‘little pocket of paradise’. This pondless stream was constructed in an area that only receives dappled light, so the planting pallet was exclusively ferns and mosses - a perfect environment to flourish!
This gorgeous water feature was constructed in a very tight area, approximately 12 square metres, and is a fantastic example of what you can do in a small space!
Pondless waterfall
Templestowe, Victoria.
Positioned in front of the large lounge room window, this exquisite pondless waterfall takes pride of place in the front garden of this Templestowe family home.  The property has a significant fall across the front garden so we utilised these natural levels to create a large waterfall with an impressive drop into a shallow pool that slowly drains into an underground reservoir.
Finished with water loving ferns, several varieties of moss and reclaimed tree limbs, this project has become a centre piece for this property, particularly at night when it’s all lit up.
Recreation pond oasis
West Footscray, Victoria.
This humble West Footscray backyard has been transformed into a delightful and playful oasis of native plants, green open space and a wonderful recreation pond. Complete with large sitting rocks, aquatic plants and even the odd native Murry River Rainbow fish swimming around the pond, the owners of this property certainly have many, many years of entertaining and enjoyment ahead of them in this amazing space.
This project involved full landscaping of the whole backyard and included the creation of a bespoke recreation pond, lush green lawn and native plants throughout.
Photography by Vivian Scarpari, @vivid.tones.au
Aquatic paradise in the hills - meditate and relax
Upwey, Victoria.
One of our most impressive recreation ponds to date, this amazing project was carefully designed around the client’s steep Upwey property and is situated right outside the main house, providing easy access to this space with beautiful views.
A wonderful selection of Coldstream rock has been used to create the structure of the pond and native plants are softening this space as they mature. The pond is lit inside and out, and is stocked with native fish and native aquatic plants, both of which are thriving in their new habitat. The clients have reported seeing an extensive variety of insects and wildlife access their new pond, including the elusive land crayfish of the Dandenong Ranges!  We are proud to have turned a once steep, unusable slope into an aquatic paradise that can be enjoyed day and night, all year round.
In April 2023,
Greg Wittstock
(The Pond Guy and founder of Aquascape Inc) visited us on site to walk through our amazing recreation pond - check out the
linked video in the News & Tips
section.
Photography by Vivian Scarpari, @vivid.tones.au
Native habitat garden
Longwarry, Victoria.
In the private backyard of a modern suburban home in Longwarry, you’ll find this relaxing natural fish pond surrounded by a mass of flowering Australian native plants. Our client had a vision for his new garden, one that supports the creation of habitat to attract a multitude of local wildlife. As soon as we completed his garden, our client reported seeing countless birds, frogs and insects and he couldn't be happier with this result for his space.
This project involved full landscaping of the whole property and included the creation of a bespoke fish pond and creek system in the backyard. The water feature has been complemented with Australian native shrubs and a number of small gum trees to frame the garden as it matures. The sounds of running water and wildlife are just glorious, and we can’t wait to see how this space evolves over time.
Photography by Vivian Scarpari, @vivid.tones.au
Kids adventure garden
Eltham, Victoria.
This design is all about the kids! Water, cubby house, chickens, rocks, wobble bridge, bugs, birds... everything!
We made great use of a decent fall on the block by including rock retaining walls planted with natives to soften the edges.
The design features a natural pond and stream system that both operate on different pumps so the pond can be turned on/off as required, while the stream runs all the time and ends in a bed of pebbles where all the water disappears underground. Makes things much safer for the littlies and they get so much enjoyment out of it - and I should know becuase this is my garden and my kids love it.
Photography by Vivian Scarpari, @vivid.tones.au
Native wildflower retreat
Balwyn, Victoria.
This project saw the transformation of an unused grass space at the front of a group of units, into a stunning native garden that is now enjoyed by everyone. And, no more mowing!
A wide selection of native wildflowers in bloom at different times of the year will compliment the meandering dry creek bed that fills when it rains. Visitors to the garden can take some time out on the recycled red gum sleeper bench to enjoy watching birds and insects parade around this warm and inviting garden.
Photography by Vivian Scarpari, @vivid.tones.au
Urban Retreat
2019 Melbourne International Flower & Garden Show.
This award-winning design seeks to calm the mind, improve wellness and celebrate the beauty of Australian native gardens. Complete with private studio, this design showcases a beautiful natural pond with waterfall as well as a stunning selection of native wildflowers.
Photography by Vivian Scarpari, @vivid.tones.au
Grow Together
2018 Melbourne International Flower & Garden Show.
‘Grow Together’ successfully unites a collection of elements that fosters food, family and good times. Every part of the garden is connected; from the cubby house to the creek, the pergola to the pond – it brings together the essentials for an Australian garden that is easy to fall in love with.
This design features Australian Native and Indigenous plants, sustainably sourced, reclaimed and repurposed materials, and promotes the creation of habitats for local fauna through the inclusion of a natural creek and swimming pond system.
I chose earthy, naturalistic tones for this garden, tying in the colour and texture of the native plants, reclaimed timbers, mulch, basalt rocks, Corten steel and locally sourced bluestone paving to achieve a balanced, complementary feel in this palette.
Photography by Vivian Scarpari, @vivid.tones.au